Docs (#102)
jupyter-server/jupyter_ydoc: docs/source/overview.md

# Overview

The `jupyter_ydoc` repository includes various models that JupyterLab uses for collaborative editing. These models use a specific implementation of a CRDT, the Y-CRDTs. To be more precise, the JavaScript package uses [yjs](https://github.com/yjs/yjs), while the Python package uses [y_py](https://github.com/y-crdt/ypy).

Jupyter YDoc was designed to centralize the data structures used for composing a document in a single class, hide the complicated edge cases of CRDTs, and prevent users from inserting invalid data or adding new attributes to the document that are not part of the schema.

> This repository holds a JavaScript package and its Python counterpart. In the JupyterLab context, the JavaScript package, or from now on, `@jupyter/ydoc`, contains the front-tend models used to keep the documents in the client's memory. In contrast, the Python package contains the models used in the back-end to serve documents to each client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This repository holds a JavaScript package and its Python counterpart. In the JupyterLab context, the JavaScript package, or from now on, `@jupyter/ydoc`, contains the front-end models used to keep the documents in the client's memory. In contrast, the Python package contains the models used in the back-end to serve documents to each client.
```

# Overview

The `jupyter_ydoc` repository includes various models that JupyterLab uses for collaborative editing. These models use a specific implementation of a CRDT, the Y-CRDTs. To be more precise, the JavaScript package uses [yjs](https://github.com/yjs/yjs), while the Python package uses [y_py](https://github.com/y-crdt/ypy).

Jupyter YDoc was designed to centralize the data structures used for composing a document in a single class, hide the complicated edge cases of CRDTs, and prevent users from inserting invalid data or adding new attributes to the document that are not part of the schema.

> This repository holds a JavaScript package and its Python counterpart. In the JupyterLab context, the JavaScript package, or from now on, `@jupyter/ydoc`, contains the fron-tend models used to keep the documents in the client's memory. In contrast, the Python package contains the models used in the back-end to serve documents to each client.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This repository holds a JavaScript package and its Python counterpart. In the JupyterLab context, the JavaScript package, or from now on, `@jupyter/ydoc`, contains the front-tend models used to keep the documents in the client's memory. In contrast, the Python package contains the models used in the back-end to serve documents to each client.
```

## `@jupyter/ydoc`
Built on top of [yjs](https://github.com/yjs/yjs), `@jupyter/ydoc` is a JavaScript package that includes the models used in the JupyterLab front-end for real-time collaboration. This package contains two main classes, `YFile` used for plain text documents and `YNotebook` used for the Notebook format. In the JupyterLab context, we call the models exported by this package, shared models. In addition, this package contains the `IShared` interfaces used to abstract out the implementation of the shared models in JupyterLab to make it easier to replace the CRDT implementation (Yjs) for something else if needed.

**Source Code:** [GitHub](https://github.com/jupyter-server/jupyter_ydoc/tree/main/javascript)

**Package:** [NPM](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@jupyter/ydoc)

**API documentation:**: [JavaScript API](javascript_api.rst)

> > Note: It could be that we still use the old name for the NPM package [@jupyter-notebook/ydoc](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@jupyter-notebook/ydoc)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Note: we might still use the old name for the NPM package [@jupyter-notebook/ydoc](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@jupyter-notebook/ydoc)
```

Reviewer: Let's drop the note as this was true for a very short time.

Author: As @fcollonval said, I'm going to remove this note. there is already a PR open in Lab to use the new package.
